Welcome to this section of the course, which is all about algebra.
I'm going to start this section with probably the most fundamental and most important part of algebra,
which is solving for x.
So I will show you how to use sympy to solve for a variable, a symbolic variable, and you'll also get
to learn a little bit about Python lists.
Okay.
So what does it mean to solve for x?
So if you see this expression: four X equals two, then we might wonder what is x equals to?
So to solve for x you have to isolate X on one side of the equation by doing all sorts of arithmetic
operations.
So in this case you can divide both sides by four and then you get X equals one half.
Now if you have multiple variables in the equation, you might have something like this: minus four x squared
equals Y to the one third power.
Then you can still solve for x and that solution is going to be in context of y, or Y is going to be
in the solution of x.
So we are defining X in part by the value of y.
So for this expression, the value of x turns out to be plus or minus two times the square root of minus
one which is a bizarre looking operation.
This is actually something called a imaginary operator. It's how we form complex numbers.
And I will talk about complex numbers later on in the course.
Times Y to the 1 6th.
Now you could also turn this equation around and set it equal to y.
And in this case that's actually not so difficult because Y is already on its own on one side of the
equation.
We would just have to raise both sides of this equation to the power of three to isolate y on this side.
The last thing that I want to mention before switching to Python is a little bit of terminology in algebra.
So you can have an expression like this where you have something on the left hand side of the equation
and something on the right hand side of the equation if you would move everything onto one side of the
equation then you're setting the equation equal to zero.
This is often called a homogenous form.
So this equation is in it's homogenous form.
Notice I've just moved the nine to the left.
Put a minus sign on it of course and then set the whole equation to zero.
Now the reason why I'm mentioning this is because in many sympy functions, the way to operate the function,
the way to use the function, is not by inputting an equation but by setting the equation to zero.
And then you input just the non-zero side of the equation.
So the homogenous form of the equation, you've already seen that a little bit in the previous section
with providing one input into the eq or equals function.
All right.
So with this as a background, let's now switch to Python and figure out how to solve for X. Before even
getting started,
I know that I'm going to be using the sympy module, so I'm going to import sympy
and I also want to do some nice printing, so I say From IPython dot display import display comma math.
All right.
So let's begin by creating a symbolic variable for X symbols x.
And now the expression is going to be expr....
I'm going to set this equal to a variable expr, and let's say two times x plus four minus nine.
So this is the expression.
Now as I mentioned in the slides, you can actually think of this expression like this.
Two x plus four equals nine.
However in sympy, we want to consider this to be a homogenous equation.
So we are going to specify two x plus four minus nine and implicitly we are setting this equation equal
to zero.
Like this.
However you don't write this equals zero.
You just keep it like this.
So now I can write sym dot solve.
So this is a new function or at least a function that I haven't yet introduced in the course. And the
input is going to be the expression.
And then this tells us that X equals five over two.
Now how does Python know that I want to solve for x?
It guesses -- sympy guesses that I want to solve for x because x is the only thing to solve for;
there is nothing else that's interesting to solve for in this equation.
Okay.
So the solution is five over two and we can actually quickly confirm that.
It's always a good idea to do in math whenever possible.
So we have two X equals nine minus four.
So what I'm doing is basically just moving this back to the right hand side of the equation and then
subtracting four from both sides.
So then this becomes five.
And now we divide both sides of the equation by two and we get indeed that x equals five divided
by two. All right, so you might be wondering why we need this super fancy programming language just to
solve this.
Obviously, when you have something this simple, you don't need Python; you can just do it by hand.
When you get more complicated expressions, that's when Python becomes an important tool for learning
mathematics.
All right.
So what I want to do now is print out this result in a nicer looking format.
So I encourage you to pause the video and do this, essentially what you want is something like the solution
to two x plus four minus nine is five divided by two.
So you want something that... or maybe better if it says X equals five over two.
So you want to print out something that looks like this.
All right.
So there's two ways that we can get this to work.
We can use the print function but that's not going to make really nice looking output.
It's going to look a little bit more like this. Or we can use the display math in combination with latex
code.
So first I want to print out some text.
So the text is going to be: text and then in curly brackets the solution to....
and now here I want to write out the equation, and then we need more text is X equals.
And then here I want to print out the solution.
So now we're going to need to replace this and we're going to need to replace this.
So this is going to be replaced with the expression and let's already
try that before getting too much further.
Now I need percent and then this is going to be the expression.
So the solution to two star x minus five.
So this doesn't really look like very nice formatting.
So I want to encase this in latex code, so sym dot latex and now let's try this again.
Okay.
The solution to two X minus five.
Now notice that Python actually combined the four and the minus nine here into minus five is X equals
so.
So far this is looking good.
We also need to replace this with the solution.
This is going to end up being a number like this, so I will use % G here and then we need to replace
this percent G essentially with this here.
So I'm going to copy and paste and let's see how this looks... ah! we get an error.
The input must be a real number not a list.
Ha that's funny.
What is a list in python? A list is a particular variable type.
I'm going to introduce you to a list more in a few moments.
I'll have more to say about lists in Python.
For now, suffice it to say that this output -- the output of sym dot solve -- is a list.
It's not actually a number.
There is a number inside the list but the whole object is a list.
And so what we want to do is actually just access the number that's contained inside this list, and to
do that, we can use square brackets with a zero indicating the first element.
I put this in the wrong place.
That should go after the output of solve not expression.
OK.
So now we see something that looks nicer.
So the solution to two X minus five is X equals 2.5.
Okay.
So if this notation looks a little bit confusing, then don't worry I'm going to talk more about that
in a moment.
So I said that this is called a list, and we have one element inside the list.
Now why it does sym dot solve output a list instead of just a single number?
Here there is only one solution.
However, we can have bigger equations that have more solutions to them.
So for example, let's imagine we are trying to solve the equation x squared minus four.
So now we get two solutions.
I said minus four.
We get two solutions: we get two and minus two.
And this should make sense if you think of this as an equation.
So X squared equals four.
Then you take the square root and then the square root of four is plus or minus two.
Okay.
So the solution to this expression -- x squared minus four -- is minus two and two.
So there are two solutions.
So then Python needs a way to organize these two solutions.
And the way that it does that is with a list.
So now let me talk a little bit about lists.
First of all, I'm just going to put the output of this into this other variable called sol. And now I'm
going to say this a python function called type.
It's going to tell me the class of this object, so the type of this object, sol for solution, is a list.
Now I'm going to type L E N so this is a function to tell me the length of this list.
So how many elements are in this list.
There are two elements in this list.
And we can print them out and then we see that it is indeed two elements: minus two and plus two.
And now if you wanted to access only one element of these solutions, let's say only the first element,
then you would use like I showed here, you use square brackets. And indexing the first element is actually
indexed by zero it's a little bit confusing initially but zero corresponds to the first element in python
and a python list.
And then if we want the second element in the solution, we would type one here and that gives us the
second element.
OK.
So now I'm going to show you how we can use this.
So let me get rid of this. I'm going to say the expression is equal to x squared minus four.
And then here we want to solve for the expression.
All right.
So nothing particularly new yet.
And now what I want to do is create a for loop to print out all of the solutions.
So I'm going to say for I in range 0 to length of these solutions.
So we're having a for loop I'm setting up a for loop here.
The indexing variable is called I, it's going to loop from 0 to however long the solution is.
Which means however many solutions there are to this equation, to this expression.
And now inside this for loop I'm going to print out solution number i.
So the i-th solution is, and then another plus sign for string concatenation and then we want the solution
the i-th solution.
All right so let's see what happens when I try to run this code.
Okay.
We get an error and the error is can only concatenate strings, not integers, to other strings.
So I hope you see what the problem is.
The problem is that this is a string.
This is a number but I converted into a string and this is still a number I haven't yet converted
it into a string.
So now let's try this.
Now we see Solution Number 0 is minus 2, solution number one is 2.
I think this looks a little bit awkward.
I'm going to write I plus 1 here.
So the first solution is minus 2 and the second solution is plus 2.
Now of course you could make this look a little bit fancier like this.
Mostly the point here is to show you how to interact with lists and how to get individual items from
a list.
Very good.
The next thing that I went to show you is how to solve for one variable when there are multiple variables
in the same equation.
So let's say we have an expression that contains both X and Y.
So how about X divided by 4 minus X times Y plus 5.
So now there are two variables and I'm sure that you are already screaming at your computer screen that
Y isn't yet defined and you are right!
We need to define y. y equals sym dot symbols
y.
Okay so I just ran this cell and we didn't get any errors so that's a good sign.
We haven't done anything wrong yet.
So now the question is how do we solve for x and how do we solve for y?
So let's try writing sym dot solve expression.
Let's see what happens.
Okay so here we actually get a dictionary inside of a list.
So it says that the solution for x is 20 divided by 4 y minus 1.
But it doesn't tell us what the solution for Y is.
So to make this a little bit clear what you can do is input the variable that you want to solve for.
As the second input. So I'm writing sym dot solve expr -- so the expression -- comma Y. And now I'm telling
Python explicitly to solve for -- sorry,
I said y, I meant X -- to solve for x. And now I can write Y and we get the solution for y in terms of
x. So this was a pretty productive video.
You learned how to use sympy to solve not only for one variable, but for multiple variables.
And I also told you a little bit about working with lists in python.
Now there's a couple of exercises that go along with this video, but they are a little bit more involved
and so I decided to have them be in a separate video.
So please keep watching! The next video is your opportunity to put into practice the material and concepts
that you learned in this video.